Adds introductory episodes (#11)
ImperialCollegeLondon/unit_testing_Cpp: _episodes/l1-01-introduction.md

---
title: "Introduction to testing"
teaching: 15
exercises: 5
questions:
- "Why test my software?"
- "How can I test my software?"
- "How much testing is 'enough'?"
objectives:
- "Appreciate the benefits of testing research software"
- "Understand what testing can and can't achieve"
- "Describe various approaches to testing, and relevant trade-offs"
- "Understand the concept of test coverage, and how it relates to software quality and sustainability"
- "Appreciate the benefits of test automation"
keypoints:
- "Testing is the standard approach to software quality assurance"

> - "Testing helps to ensure that code performs its intended function: well-tested code is likely to be more reliable, correct and malleable"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Testing helps to ensure that code performs its intended function: well-tested code is likely to be more reliable, correct and flexible"
```

Not sure malleable is really the right word here, plus it's a little obscure.

- "Testing can contribute to performance, security and long-term stability as the size of the codebase and its network of contributors grows"
- "Testing can ensure that software has been installed correctly, is portable to new platforms, and is compatible with new versions of its dependencies"
- "In the context of research software, testing can be used to validate code i.e. ensure that it faithfully implements scientific theory"
- "Unit (e.g. a function); Functional (e.g. a library); and Regression, (e.g. a bug) are three commonly used types of tests"
- "Test coverage can provide a coarse- or fine-grained metric of comprehensiveness, which often provides a signal of code quality"
- "Automated testing is another such signal: it lowers friction; ensures that breakage is identified sooner and isn't released; and implies that machine-readable instructions exist for building and code and running the tests"
- "Testing ultimately contributes to sustainability i.e. that software is (and remains) fit for purpose as its functionality and/or contributor-base grows, and its dependencies and/or runtime environments change"
---

## Why Test?

> There are a number of compelling reasons to properly test a research code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a number of compelling reasons to properly test research code:
```

- [Unit testing](https://softwaretestingfundamentals.com/unit-testing/)
- [Integration testing](https://softwaretestingfundamentals.com/integration-testing/)
- [System testing](https://softwaretestingfundamentals.com/system-testing/)
- [Acceptance testing](https://softwaretestingfundamentals.com/acceptance-testing/)
- [Functional testing](https://softwaretestingfundamentals.com/functional-testing/)
- [Compliance testing](https://softwaretestingfundamentals.com/compliance-testing/)
- [Performance testing](https://softwaretestingfundamentals.com/performance-testing/)
- [Regression testing](https://softwaretestingfundamentals.com/regression-testing/)
- [Usability testing](https://softwaretestingfundamentals.com/usability-testing/)
- [Penetration or security testing](https://softwaretestingfundamentals.com/security-testing/)
- (and others)

The jargon here can be intimidating, but you do not need to to worry about most
of these for this course.

You can get more information about most of these types of testing as well as
in general about several techniques used when writing tests in
[Software Testing Fundamentals](http://softwaretestingfundamentals.com).

### Unit Testing

> This is the main type of testing kind we will be dealing with in this course. Unit

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the main type of testing we will be dealing with in this course. Unit
```

testing refers to **taking a component of a program and testing it in
isolation**. Generally this means testing an individual class or function.

For this kind of testing to make sense, or even just to work, your code needs to
be modular, written in small, independent components that can be easily unit tested.

> Therefore, a side effect of writing unit tests is that if forces you, in a sense,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, a side effect of writing unit tests is that it forces you, in a sense,
```

to improve the quality and sustainability of your code because, otherwise, it will
not be testable!

### Integration Testing

Integration goes a step forward and tests if multiple components working as a group
work as expected. They are typically designed to expose faults in the

> interaction of the different units, eg. inconsistent number or type of inputs/outputs,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interaction of the different units, e.g. inconsistent number or type of inputs/outputs,
```

wrong structure of these, inconsistent physical units, etc.

### Testing Done Right

> It's important to be clear about what software tests are able to provide and
> what they can't. Unfortunately it isn't possible to write tests that completely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important to be clear about what software tests can provide and
what they can't. Unfortunately it isn't possible to write tests that completely
```

> below:
> 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ### Case 1 - Use either 0 or 1 as input
> >
> > **Correct output:*- Same as input
> > **Coverage:*- First section of if-block
> > **Reason:*- This represents the simplest possible test for the function. The
> > value of this test is that it exercises only the special case tested for by
> > the if-block.
> >
> > ### Case 2 - Use a value > 1 as input
> >
> > **Correct output:*- Appropriate value from the Fibonacci sequence
> > **Coverage:*- All of the code
> > **Reason:*- This is a more fully fledged case that is representative of the
> > majority of the possible range of input values for the function. It covers
> > not only the special case represented by the first if-block but the general
> > case where recursion is invoked.
> >
> > ### Case 3 - Use a negative value as input
> >
> > **Correct output:*- Depends...
> > **Coverage:*- First section of if-block
> > **Reason:*- This represents the case of a possible input to the function
> > that is outside of its intended usage. At the moment the function will just
> > return the input value, but whether this is the correct behaviour depends on

> > > the wider context in which it will be used. It might be better for this type
> > > of input value to cause an error to be raised however. The value of this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > the wider context in which it will be used. It might be better for this type
> > of input value to throw an exception, however. The value of this
```

This tends to be the terminology used for C++.

> > test case is that it encourages you to think about this scenario and what
> > the behaviour should be. It also demonstrates to others that you've
> > considered this scenario and the function behaviour is as intended.
> >
> > ### Case 4 - Use a non-integer input e.g. 3.5
> >

> > > **Correct output:*- No output - it will fail, possibly during compilation.

Reviewer: This point doesn't really apply in C++, with it being a strongly typed language. We *might* be able to contrive a vaguely analogous case for C++, but maybe we should just drop this.

Alternatively, we could remind the reader that you don't have this kind of problem with C++ because it's strongly typed. It's probably outside the scope of this course, but writing code to take advantage of C++'s type system so the compiler can flag up errors is good practice.

Author: Sorted!
